Hello again!
In this video, we are going to talk about lock-free programming.
A lock-free program is one in which threads can safely execute critical sections without needing help from
the operating system to provide locks.
A lock-free programs can avoid or at least reduce some of the drawbacks to using locks.
We have seen you
can get a race condition, if you do not lock or if you use the wrong mutex.
If you have multiple
mutexes there is the risk of deadlock.
Something we have not mentioned - I don't think - is the overhead of using mutexes.
Mutexes are actually managed by the operating system.
So when a program locks or unlocks a mutex, it has to make a call to the operating system.
It will stop running its own code.
It will wait for the operating system to respond.
And then the operating system will need to update some of its internal data structures before the program
can continue.
If we have a linked list with one mutex which is used for every access, then that means that
only one thread can access any element in that list at any one time.
And that reduces the scalability because in effect,
when the program accesses that list, it becomes
a single threaded program.
At the opposite extreme, if we have fine-grained locking in a linked list, we lock the element
and the ones surrounding it, that will make the program much more complex and add more overhead because
we are doing all this locking.
Using locks also affects composability. If you have a function which takes a lock, then you should not
call any functions which might take a lock, even if it is a different mutex.
The great advantage of lock-free programming is, if you do it correctly, threads can never get blocked.
Unless
they actually want to. You cannot have deadlock or livelock because there are not any locks.
If a thread is blocked, waiting for a resource, other threads can still continue to execute.
And this is very useful if you have work that must be done within a fixed time limit. For example,
real time systems where something has to be done in the next so many milliseconds or by a certain time.
Some applications where this is useful: double-checked locking, reference counters and spin locks.
One way you can think about programming with and without locks is to think about traffic intersections.
So the traffic junction corresponds to the critical section and the actual different vehicles in the
traffic correspond to different threads.
Obviously, all these vehicles want to get through the intersection as quickly as possible.
But if they try to do that, there will be a horrible collision.
One way to do this is to have traffic lights or a policeman who will control access. Everyone has to
stop and wait until they can go into the critical section.
And that is analogous to locks.
Another alternative is the kind of intersections that you have on motorways [freeways]. So big, complex roundabouts
in the air, slip roads, and that is analogous to lock free.
Instead of having one central person organizing everything, the traffic organizes itself or at least
tries to.
In this kind of intersection, traffic from different levels can go over the same section at the same
time, and the traffic from one level, that is one thread, can merge with traffic from a different level
without having to stop.
Obviously, this all has to be done very carefully, otherwise there will be a collision.
The drawbacks of lock-free programming are that it is very difficult. Writing lock-free code, which
is correct and efficient, can often defeat experts.
I have seen examples of code that was written by an expert and checked by another expert,
that still had
a subtle bug in it.
Many basic data structures cannot be written as lock-free.
For example, the basic double-linked list,
which is fairly straightforward, you might think.
No one has yet found an algorithm for writing that
in a lock-free way. Or at least that was the case a couple of years ago.
Lock-free programming is conceptually very complicated.
We are not really going to go into that. But a lot of the assumptions that you normally make about
programs will break down.
For example, one of the basic assumptions we make is that we write some code and it is going to be executed
in the order that we wrote it.
That's not necessarily true in lock-free programming.
And this complexity makes it unsuitable for many applications.
If, for example, you are writing a GUI application where you are using threads to keep the various functional
features of the program separate, then there is no advantage to making that lock-free.
On the other hand, if you have something where performance really is critical, such as infrastructure
in a financial system, for example, then there may be some benefit from using lock-free programming.
In general, lock-free programming should only be used if there is some data structure in the program
which is subject to high contention. In a financial application,
this could be the buffer which receives all the incoming orders and using locks causes unacceptable
performance.
In that example, there would be a good case for writing a lock-free version, provided, of course, it
does actually offer the performance that is needed.
Right, one last thing before we finish this section. Let's come back to double checked looking.
We've seen it several different ways and now we are going to look at the classic way of solving it.
Before
C++11,
this was the only way to do it.
Obviously, C++ did not support threads or atomic variables,
but there were libraries that allowed you to
do this.
You will remember that the double checked looking problem, is to initialize a variable and make sure
it only gets initialized once.
The classic solution is that we make the variable that we are initializing atomic.
So we have a pointer to some type and then we make that atomic.
And that will solve the problem where we had the race condition with the value of the pointer not necessarily
being updated when the object was initialized.
One slight complication is that atomic types do not have any dereferencing operators.
If we want to do anything with this pointer, we will will have to copy it to a normal non-atomic pointer
before we can use it. So we could do something like that.
Well, we could use a cast, but generally casts are a bad idea.
And in any case, the cast will do exactly the same thing.
So there is no gain from doing that.
So the code would look like this, we have the class that we want to create an instance of.
We have
the instance that we have made atomic. We have the mutex that is going to do the locking.
And then the actual code for doing the double checked looking is exactly the same.
The difference is that this ptr variable is atomic, so we are guaranteed that the assignment is not
interruptible.
So there is no possibility another thread could come in and see a partially initialized or uninitialized
object.
And then we have to get a normal, non-atomic pointer to actually do anything with it.
And the rest of the program is just normal stuff, we just create some threads.
And join on them. The headers are what you would expect.
OK.
OK, so that's it for this video and this section. I'll see you next time, but meanwhile, keep coding!